I generally make the kind of videos that
I want to watch myself I make long
sprawling freeform conversational
podcast videos all the time 40 minute
videos hour-long videos because that's
what I won't watch myself and I hear
from all the people who are the same way
you know you're washing the dishes
you're lifting weights I don't know
you're exterminating rats from your
basement and you want to listen to that
podcast not everybody wants that some
people want focused five-minute videos
to get right to the point so thought I
might do a series of videos of that kind
providing advice and reflections on
teaching ocean China is the first of
those videos ah so look we're gonna
cover two topics in this video and two
topics only the economics of teaching
English in China and the visa situation
so I've posted our earlier discussion
which is a sprawling freeform 40 minute
podcast and contains some useful
information but some people find it
annoying to get the information out of
that format I posted that to a reddit
discussion group for exactly these kinds
of issues and I noticed they had like a
disclaimer that they wouldn't even allow
people to discuss going to China without
getting the proper work visa and you
know apparently like I guess the
monitors were just so sick of people
writing and wanting advice about like oh
well they've been invited to come and
work in China but the employer admits
they can't really do the paperwork and
so on and so forth although I do not
think it is the definitive reason to
either work in mainland China or to not
work in mainland China this is an
endemic problem and in 2017 it's getting
worse and worse my prediction is in 2018
it'll be a complete disaster and then in
2019 the government will recognize as a
disaster and change the rules so I don't
I don't think this can go on forever but
yeah right now it is absolutely hit a
crisis point
if your employer admits to you that they
can't do the paperwork they're being
honest with you and you should encourage
that honesty back in like 2007 it was
true that like the stereotype was that
small private for-profit schools
couldn't get the paperwork together but
that large large institutions like
universities I teach English ready at a
university that they had no problem
maybe back in 2007 that was accurate
today it's just this endemic problem
across the board and you get schools
that are offering to employ you as a
teacher but they'll fill out the
paperwork
as if you're like an administrative
assistant as if you're doing some other
job or some other role where they can
process the paperwork and even the big
institutions like universities will say
to you well once you come here to teach
but you could simultaneously take
classes learning Chinese or some other
language and we'll do the paperwork so
that you're a student and you get a
student work visa where you can work
within the premises you can work within
the university well at the same time
taking lessons so long story short on
that is you got to see this from the
employers perspective I don't know why I
mean there's this really kind of hostile
self-indulgent attitude that that
predominates on the internet because
that's the way people use the Internet I
guess they come on when they just want
to vent but think about it from the
employers perspective just a little bit
if you're asking an employer to choose
you and commit a lot of time and money
to you maybe training you also like if
you had done of a background already
English teacher and they've never met
you like you're just doing an interview
by a Skype it's a lot to ask it's
understandable that a lot of these
employers trying to say well look can
you come for an interview in person can
you come and teach demo lessons come and
teach a couple lessons of observation
and then we'll decide if we want to
commit to doing this paperwork for you
and the truth is even then they may not
be able to deliver the paperwork and it
may be for bizarre reasons that are
beyond their control
and beyond your control so I'm an
experienced English teacher although
it's not my career I did it in between
other jobs but when I came here to teach
English they wanted paperwork from
Cambodia because I had formerly been
employed as an English teacher in
Cambodia they wanted paperwork from
Thailand and Laos and this stuff I just
laughed at them I said look if I go on a
world tour to get you paperwork from all
these countries I'll never earn back
that money doing this job the rate of
pay is so low you got to be kidding me
but that's that's what they wanted and
this is for teaching at a university
level in China
so again and I had brought all the
correct paperwork from Canada but that
wasn't enough I did have a criminal
record check I do have a bachelor's
degree I proof that I have a bachelor's
degree I had everything else in line so
it's a disaster and China is not your
only option if what you want is to learn
Chinese and teach English you can go to
Taiwan you can go to Hong Kong I
wouldn't advise it because for one thing
mostly in Hong Kong
speak Cantonese and quite a number of
other southern dialects but not so much
standard Chinese and also Hong Kong as a
horrible city to live in I have lived
and worked in Hong Kong in the past not
as an English teacher I had a much more
high-paying job there we just let me in
my life possible in Hong Kong so this is
the point is you just have to see it in
a comparative framework like if China is
such a drag
about visa paperwork why not go to Hong
Kong want to go to Hong Kong instead
want to go to Taiwan instead want to go
to South Korea instead want to go to
Japan instead why not go to Brazil
instead like the world's your oyster
when I go to Portugal instead it can be
fabulous living as an English teacher
they're different places in Europe that
employ a lot of English teachers so
China is eliminating itself as a viable
option in 2017 whereas I would say back
in like 2005 it was really the Wild West
it was the land of opportunity but
increasing requirements for credentials
and it's it's not even the credentials
of the problem it's just people work for
the sake of paperwork
it's ceasing to be a viable option and
the other thing was going to mention
here is the economics of the situation
so look I already knew I was highly paid
I came I came here in person I
interviewed for this job face to face
before they gave me the job which most
of you don't at the luxury of doing if
you're living in New York City you can't
just casually fly to China for a job
interview I was already living in
Kunming so I flew to Hong Kong should
the home for the job interview
and flew back again and they did pay for
my airplane ticket after the fact they
said we can pay for your airplane ticket
if we give you the job but not if you
don't pass the interview I said okay
I'll take that risk so I flew in at a
face-to-face interview and that put me
in a very strong negotiating position I
would say for this job so I negotiated a
whole list of things that weren't on
offer by default with a job I'm paid
more than any other foreign language
teacher they've ever employed in the
past and I found out just recently I'm
paid more than my own boss my own boss
in the institution makes less than me on
a monthly basis so I can't ask for
anything more there's no way it could be
reasonable for me to ask this
institution to pay me a higher rate than
I'm getting and for you also that's true
but what have I paid I am paid five
thousand qu per month
five thousand UN five thousand the
Chinese currency so compared to even the
humblest job in Canada
working at a gas station serving coffee
at a Starbucks the pay is garbage
the pay is nothing compared to the
sacrifice and time effort and energy
going to make coming over here the pay
however is excellent if you're comparing
this to being in a master's degree
program in the United States if you're
comparing this to pay in tuition to
learn Chinese that are really in a
really crappy environment in a
university in Canada so instead of me
paying $5,000 a year in tuition in
Canada or me paying $20,000 a year to
study the United States I am getting a
sort of educational experience if I
consider myself a student I may be
breaking even financially she is she's
great I don't think I am I think this is
costing me a lot more than I'm earning
to be honest with you
but anyway I'm spending less money here
for that educational opportunity to
learn Chinese so if you're asking the
question broadly in terms of economics
should you do it the answer absolutely
cannot be economics if you want to earn
money maybe South Korea is a different
story maybe Taiwan's difference Tori
maybe Japan is a different story I'm
very skeptical that those can be
justified financially keeping all the
weight real but I'm telling you mainland
China in 2017 the justification must be
your own education your own
self-improvement it cannot possibly be
the money the money alone doesn't
justify the exercise and that is part
and parcel Hawaiians have already said
2017 2018 is going to be a nationwide
crisis in China because even the
universities that offer excellent living
conditions health insurance really great
package of benefits I get here I mean
I'm I'm treated much better than 90% of
an English teacher is 90 percent or 95
percent I've excellent I got a great
deal here and I get to teach all my
students are also well prepared they
know how to study I don't have hostile
students who don't want to learn English
or something really great situation in
so many ways but nevertheless this job
can't compete with Taiwan and it can't
compete with me going back to Canada I
work in a gas station even for he and
the gas station was the only option I
had so therefore there's absolutely no
way I can look into this camera and say
do you want to say this is a good option
for you what this is a great option
unless it's an option you're pursuing
for your own education you want to learn
Chinese you want to learn
means you want to learn some other
language that's taught at the particular
University of study yet that's it for
this video I am out